---
layout: post
title: Returning Back (Weekly Update 8)
tag: weekly-update
categories: ["Weekly Update"]
---

In this post, I talk about what I've been doing this past week (reviewing Katok and reading chapter 10
of Rudin).

# Personal Life

We got back from our mini vacation Sunday, and Monday was straight back to work. It has been a little hard focusing on work after such a long break. Some things I felt very confident in coming back to, and other things took a little bit of review. As far as dynamics goes, my last two posts have really discussed all I've been thinking about. With functional analysis, there was a little more structure so it was maybe easier for me to jump back in.

# Dynamics

I wrote two other posts outlining what I've been doing. They can be found [here](https://marshareb.github.io/Exploring-Degree/) and [here](https://marshareb.github.io/Exploring-Moduli/). Word of warning: these were very casually written and not proofread. I know for the degree post there is a slight typo in the construction which is easily fixed. The interpretation is the same, but there should be some statement about orientation, positive rotations, and negative rotations. The modulus one was written as me trying to parse Katok & Hasselblatt's words, so a lot of it is maybe ad hoc-y. I think the "Exploring" series may be more experimentally tackling things like this, where I don't really focus on actually doing it correctly but instead trying to understand the core ideas. We'll see. 

# Functional Analysis

I started reading Rudin's chapter 10 as well as doing problems from chapter 4. I might make a post later on the problems themselves, but they're more focused on compact operators (which I don't think I've discussed in any depth yet). Chapter 10 moves on to exploring Banach algebras, which are pretty interesting (and seem to have a lot of geometric structure, which is nice). It almost makes me wish that I studied a little more functional analysis before doing Lie groups/algebras, since this seems to motivate a lot of definitions.

Let $A$ be a set. An algebra structure on $A$ is what you might expect; you take a vector space structure on $A$ and you add in a multiplication structure which is compatible with scalar multiplication. More formally, a *complex algebra* is a vector space $A$ over $\mathbb{C}$ which has a multiplication structure satisfying

\[ x(yz) = (xy)z, \ (x+y)z = xz + yz, \ x(y+z) = xy + xz, \]

\[ \alpha(xy) = (\alpha x)y = x(\alpha y),\]

where $x,y,z \in A$ and $\alpha \in \mathbb{C}$. Note we didn't necessarily force there to be an identity; taking $L^1([0,1])$ and equipping it with a multiplication structure defined by convolution, we see that we don't have an identity (the proof of this, as far as I know, uses some Fourier tricks, though I believe a friend has a proof that only does Lebesgue differentiation stuff).

If $A$ has the additional structure of a complete norm, i.e. $A$ is also a Banach space, then if we have that the norm satisfies

\[ \|xy\| \leq \|x\| \|y\| \]

and also the property that if $A$ has an identity $e$ with

\[ \|e\| = 1,\]

then $A$ is called a *Banach algebra*.

(I accidentally got distracted at this point talking about another problem, so ran out of time to write more. I'll continue with this in the next weekly update.)
