---
layout: post
title: Fall 2020 Semester
tag: ergodic
categories: ["Dynamics"]
---

In this post, I talk a bit about the semester.

## Semester

The semester was a long one. I'm used to the feeling of not accomplishing everything I want during a semester, but somehow this semester felt worse than usual -- maybe it was the fact that I was working from home and I never really got to detach from my work. I generally did a better job of separating my work from my life in terms of activities, but without that extra layer of going to the office/class it was hard to mentally separate the two.

I did my usual write ups for the classes I'm working on. [Here](/files/cohomologicalequations.pdf) are my notes on cohomological equations. This comes with a warning of a LOT of typos and mistakes. I hope to someday return and clean it up so that it's presentable. [Here](/files/MA_7221.pdf) are my Ergodic theory problems. I've read over some of the misc solutions and there are plenty of typos, but I think the core ideas are correct (and at least they give you a hint or a starting point). I also have a master file for some solutions from other textbooks, but I'm hoping to do more of those over break. I'll upload those sometime in January. I'm also planning on doing some mapping class groups stuff, as well as help a few old tutoree students with real analysis. Overall, a busy break, but hopefully productive! I might bring back the weekly updates as well, though that'll depend on my energy levels (currently very low).

Hope my readers have a lovely break.
