---
layout: post
title: Generic Vectors
tag: dynamics
categories: ["Dynamics"]
---

In this post I prove the existence of generic vectors.

# Proof of Existence of Generic Vectors

We follow [Wilkinson's notes](https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=2ahUKEwj96c-ytZn2AhWnlIkEHQTRAUoQFnoECAcQAQ&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.math.utah.edu%2Fpcmi12%2Flecture_notes%2Fwilkinson.pdf&usg=AOvVaw0p1Tvf5sm3rABquRWsYfR-) on Otal's theorem. In particular, this is solving Exercise 4.6.

Let $$\phi^t : T^1M \rightarrow T^1M$$ be an ergodic flow (with respect to a measure $$\lambda$$) on the unit tangent bundle of a Riemannian manifold. We say that a vector $$v \in T^1M$$ is **generic** with respect to the flow if for every continuous function $$k : T^1M \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$$ we have

$$ \lim_{T \rightarrow \infty} \frac{1}{T} \int_0^T k(\phi^t(v)) dt = \frac{1}{\lambda(T^1M)} \int_{T^1M} k(v) d\lambda(v).$$

The goal of the article is to prove the following claim.

**Claim:** Almost every $$v \in T^1M$$ is generic.

The two main ingredients are the following.

1) **Theorem:** (Birkhoff Ergodic Theorem) If $$f^t : X \rightarrow X$$ is an ergodic flow with respect to the measure $$m$$, then for all $$k \in L^1(m)$$ the following equality holds for $$m$$ almost every $$x \in X$$:

$$ \lim_{T \rightarrow \infty}\frac{1}{T} \int_0^T k(f^t(x)) dt = \int_X f dm.$$

2) There is a countable dense subset of $$C(T^1M)$$. Label this $$(k_n)_{n = 1}^\infty \subseteq C(T^1M)$$.

With these, we can prove the claim.

**Proof:** Without loss of generality, let's just assume $$\lambda$$ is a probability measure. Let

$$\Gamma(m) := \left\{v \in T^1M \ | \ \lim_{T \rightarrow \infty} \frac{1}{T} \int_0^T k_m(\phi^t(v)) dt = \int_{T^1M} k_m(v) d\lambda(v) \right\}.$$

The Birkhoff ergodic theorem tells us that this has measure $$1$$. The countable intersection of sets with measure $$1$$ still has measure $$1$$, so let

$$ \Gamma := \bigcap_{m = 1}^\infty \Gamma(m).$$

Then $$\lambda(\Gamma) = 1$$ still. Now let $$k \in C(T^1M)$$. Since $$\{k_m\}$$ is dense, we can assume that we have a sequence so that $$k_m \rightarrow k$$. Thus we can write

$$  \int_{T^1M} k(v) d\lambda(v) \xleftarrow[]{m \rightarrow \infty} \int_{T^1M} k_m(v) d\lambda(v) \xleftarrow[]{T \rightarrow \infty} \frac{1}{T} \int_0^T k_m(\phi^t(v)) dt \xrightarrow[]{m \rightarrow \infty} \frac{1}{T} \int_0^T k(\phi^t(v)) dt.$$

We'd like to somehow relate all of these without worrying about the limits (as something may go wrong here). Fix $$\epsilon > 0$$. We can find $$N$$ so that for all $$m \geq N$$ the following holds:

$$ \|k_m - k\|_\infty < \epsilon.$$

Now we see that for $$v \in \Gamma$$ we have

$$ \left\| \int_{T^1M} k d\lambda - \frac{1}{T} \int_0^T k(\phi^t(v))dt \right\| \leq \left\| \int_{T^1M} k d\lambda - \frac{1}{T} \int_0^T k_m(\phi^t(v)) dt \right\| + \left\|\frac{1}{T} \int_0^T k_m(\phi^t(v))dt + \frac{1}{T} \int_0^T k(\phi^t(v))dt \right|. $$

Notice that the term on the right satisfies

$$ \left\|\frac{1}{T} \int_0^T k_m(\phi^t(v))dt + \frac{1}{T} \int_0^T k(\phi^t(v))dt \right| \leq \frac{1}{T} \int_0^T \|k_m - k\|_\infty dt = \epsilon.$$

We can break up the term on the left again to get

$$ \begin{split}\left\| \int_{T^1M} k d\lambda - \frac{1}{T} \int_0^T k_m(\phi^t(v)) dt \right\| \leq \left\| \int_{T^1M} [k - k_m] d\lambda \right\| + \left\| \int_{T^1M} k_m d\lambda - \frac{1}{T} \int_0^T k(\phi^t(v)) dt \right\| \\ \leq \epsilon + \left\| \int_{T^1M} k_m d\lambda - \frac{1}{T} \int_0^T k(\phi^t(v)) dt \right\|.\end{split}$$

Apriori we already know that as $$T \rightarrow \infty$$ the term on the right tends to zero. Hence

$$ \left\| \int_{T^1M} k d\lambda - \lim_{T \rightarrow \infty}\frac{1}{T} \int_0^T k(\phi^t(v))dt \right\| \leq 2 \epsilon.$$

However our choice of $$\epsilon > 0$$ was arbitrary, so we let $$\epsilon \rightarrow 0$$ and the result follows. Hence every $$v \in \Gamma$$ is generic and so almost every $$v \in T^1M$$ is generic. $$\blacksquare$$
