---
layout: post
title: Absolutely Continuous Ergodic Measures
tag: dynamics
categories: ["Dynamics"]
---

In this post I prove a result on absolutely continuous ergodic measures.

# Set Up

Let $$X$$ be a topological space. We will restrict ourselves to studying the **Borel $$\sigma$$-algebra** on $$X$$ for now (although the results should be true for other $$\sigma$$-algebras). Recall that this is the $$\sigma$$-algebra generated by the open sets of $$X$$. We will fix a transformation $$T : X \rightarrow X$$ for now. Recall that a measure is said to be **ergodic** with respect to $$T$$ (or vice versa, $$T$$ is ergodic with respect to $$\mu$$) if the following hold:

- $$\mu(T^{-1}(A)) = \mu(A)$$ for all $$A$$ measurable.

- If $$T^{-1}(A) \subseteq A$$ then we either have $$\mu(A) = 0$$ or $$1$$.

The first condition above is generally referred to as **measure preserving** (so $$T$$ is measure preserving with respect to $$\mu$$). There are many equivalent definitions for a measure preserving transformation to be ergodic. The one of interest to us is the following.

**Observation:** Let $$T : X \rightarrow X$$ be a measure preserving transformation with respect to the measure $$\mu$$. We have that $$T$$ is ergodic with respect to $$\mu$$ if and only if every $$f \in L^1(\mu)$$ which is $$T$$-invariant is constant almost everywhere.

**Proof:** We break this up into steps.

$$(\implies):$$ Assume that $$T$$ is ergodic. Let $$f \in L^1(\mu)$$ be $$T$$-invariant, so $$f \circ T = f$$ almost everywhere. Assume that $$f$$ is not constant almost everywhere for contradiction. There is a constant $$c \in \mathbb{R}$$ so that if we let $$A := \{f \leq c\}$$ then $$0 < \mu(A) < 1$$. Since $$f \circ T = f$$ almost everywhere, we get that

$$T^{-1}(A) = \{ x \in X \ | \ f(T(x)) \geq c\} = A,$$

at least up to a set of measure $$0$$. This gives us the contradiction, since ergodicity forces either $$\mu(A) = 0$$ or $$1$$.

$$(\impliedby):$$ Assume that the condition holds for every $$f \in L^1(\mu)$$. In particular, it holds for characteristic functions. Recall $$\chi_A \circ T(x) = \chi_{T^{-1}(A)}(x),$$ so $$\chi_A$$ being $$T$$-invariant implies that $$\chi_{T^{-1}(A)} = \chi_A$$ which implies that $$\chi_A$$ is constant almost everywhere, hence it is almost everywhere $$0$$ or $$1$$. Now we integrate this to get that $$\mu(A) = 0$$ or $$\mu(A) = 1$$. $$\blacksquare$$

Let $$\lambda$$ be a measure on $$X$$. We say that a measure $$\mu$$ is **absolutely continuous** with respect to $$\lambda$$, which we denote by $$\mu \ll \lambda$$, if for every measurable $$A$$ with $$\lambda(A) = 0$$ we have $$\mu(A) = 0$$.

Our goal is to prove the following result.

**Proposition:** If $$\mu$$ is an ergodic $$T$$-invariant probability measure and $$\lambda$$ is a $$T$$-invariant probability measure with $$\lambda \ll \mu$$, then $$\lambda = \mu$$.

In other words, ergodic measures are "minimal" with respect to this domination property.

To prove this, we will need the following theorem from measure theory.

**Theorem:** If $$\lambda \ll \mu$$ then there is a measurable density function $$\rho : X \rightarrow [0,\infty)$$ so that

$$ \lambda(A) = \int_A \rho d\mu.$$

This $$\rho$$ is called the **Radon-Nikodym derivative**.

We will also need the following exercise from measure theory.

**Observation:** Let $$\mu$$ be a probability measure on $$X$$. Suppose that $$f, g$$ are integrable. If $$\int_A fd\mu = \int_A g d\mu$$ for every measurable set $$A$$, then $$f = g$$ almost everywhere.

**Proof:** It suffices to show that if $$\int_A f d\mu = 0$$ for every measurable set, then $$f =0$$ almost everywhere. Observe first that this implies that $$\int_A |f| d\mu = 0$$ for every measurable set $$A$$. To see why, let $$A_0 = \{f > 0\}$$ and $$A_1 = \{f \leq 0\}$$. Then we have

$$ 0 = \int_{A \cap A_0} f d\mu = \int_{A \cap A_0} |f| d\mu,$$

$$ 0 = \int_{A \cap A_1} f d\mu = - \int_{A \cap A_1} |f| d\mu,$$

hence

$$ \int_A |f| d\mu = \int_{A \cap A_0} |f| d\mu + \int_{A \cap A_1} |f| d\mu = 0.$$

Now suppose that $$f$$ is not zero almost everywhere. There is a constant $$c > 0$$ so that $$A := \{|f| > c\}$$ has strictly positive measure. Now we integrate

$$ 0 = \int_A |f| > \int_A c = \mu(A) c > 0.$$

This is a contradiction, so we must have that $f$ is zero almost everywhere. $$\blacksquare$$

# Proof of Result

We now give a short proof.

Observe by the usual density argument for characteristic functions we have that for any $$f$$ which is integrable the following holds:

$$ \int \rho f d\mu = \int f d\lambda.$$

Now assume that $$f$$ is integrable. We see that

$$ \int_X \rho f d\mu = \int_X f d\lambda = \int_X f d(\lambda \circ T^{-1}) = \int_X f \circ T d\lambda = \int_X \rho (f \circ T) d\mu = \int_X \rho \circ T^{-1} f d\mu.$$

Now if we take the characteristic functions of measurable sets, we see that for every measurable set $$A$$ the following holds:

$$ \int_A \rho d\mu = \int_A \rho \circ T^{-1} d\mu.$$

Thus by the observation in the last section we have that $$\rho = \rho \circ T^{-1}$$ almost everywhere. Ergodicity of $$\mu$$ implies that $$\rho$$ is a constant almost everywhere, say $$\rho \equiv c$$ almost everywhere. Finally, these are probability measures, so

$$ 1 = \lambda(X) = \int_{X} \rho d\mu = c \mu(X) = c.$$

Hence $$\rho \equiv 1$$ almost everywhere and we have that $$\mu = \lambda$$. $$\blacksquare$$
